Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Vicky O. She is
an associate professor in the Anthropology department and director
of the Primate Ecology and molecular Anthropology lab. At
the University of California Santa Cruz. And today we're
going to talk mostly about the evolution of the
human diet or of human diets in the plural.
So, Vicky, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thank you Ricardo for inviting me. Uh, I'm
very excited to, and I'm very curious if I
can answer like the many questions that you have.
Uh, I saw that you, you, you want to
dive into deep time with me, so, so let's
go.
Yeah, sure. So let's start with this. How can
we study human diets through archaeological and fossil remains?
I mean, what do we look at and what
kinds of evidence can we find in the fossil
remains?
Right? So like what kind of methods we can
actually. Employ, right? So, so let me like kind
of clarify what we're, we're talking about. So like,
uh, if we're talking about the evolution of the
human diet, right, uh, we're like much more like
temporarily, uh, constrained if we think about that, we're
thinking that, um, our own species Homo sapiens probably
evolved. Uh, EARLIER than, uh, 300,000 years ago, right?
Um, BUT a lot of people that, um, are
studying actually, uh, the evolution of the human diet
go much, much further back into time, right? So
we're actually like looking further into, um, our more
ancestral. Uh, LINEAGE of our species, right, like looking
into, uh, early Homo and all the other, uh,
hominin species that we know of in South and,
uh, East Africa, um, that are, you know, our,
our, uh, cousins and sister Texans, uh, in early
human evolution and so. The, the spectrum of methods
that we as uh biological anthropologists use is actually
like um uh it's actually a pretty big tool
kit and increasingly, uh, scholars are using many different
lines of evidence about the dietary adaptations of uh
fossil hominins, uh, or, uh, early humans, um. Uh,
TO kind of like have a, a bigger picture,
right? And so one of the methods that allows
us actually to go pretty deep into time is
the one, that I'm specialist in, which is, uh,
isotope analysis. Uh, AND so I'm happy to talk
about that much more. But, um, just to give
you a little bit more of a framework, there
are many other methods that we actually look at.
So, um, before isotopes were kind of like on
the table, uh, as a, as a Biomolecular tool
to look into diet. We mainly were looking at
the morphology of these um early fossil hominins, uh,
looking particularly at their mastication apparatus and their teeth,
right? Because the, the size and shape, uh, so
the morphology of the teeth actually say a lot
about what a given critter, uh, is evolved to
consume. Um, AND along with like just like the
morphology of the teeth, but also like the whole
mastication apparatus. Another way of looking into, um, the
dietary adaptations of, of creatures is to actually look
at dental wear, right? So if We're using our
teeth as animals to process foods, right? Like so
our teeth are actually this incredible interface that we
have between the environment. That the ecosystem that provides
the food resources and our own body, right? Like
that first point of contact uh is actually the
dentition. And so the teeth often leave a lot
of very, very interesting. Traces of what has been
chewed in the terms of scratch marks and and
pits uh that form um through the consumption of
maybe soft foods, but particularly through uh hard and
tough, uh, and abrasive foods. Um, SO then, besides.
These two lines of evidence. So also in the
microware world, there has been a lot of like
incredible, uh, work over the last like, uh, decade
or two in terms of really going into like
the micro surface texture that, uh, is associated with
eating different kinds of foods. Uh, WHAT I'm specialized
in, as I already said, is isotopes. And in
deep time, uh, we also work with teeth. Uh,
SO when we are actually looking at the uh
biomolecular, uh, or, or sorry, biochemical signal that uh
we find in, uh, for example, uh, Early fossil,
um, hominins, uh, or also later in, uh, Homo
sapiens, uh, in our sister Texans, like, for example,
uh, Neanderthals. Um, WE often like refer to tiny
little pieces of the tooth enamel, um, and measure
the isotope ratio of specific elements that are very
abundant in our food and indicate something of the
nature of the food that was eaten. And we
rely on teeth, not because like the teeth are
having that interaction with the food items themselves, but
because the teeth, uh, are incorporating all the elements
that we actually consume through food and also through
water, and they become deposited in our tooth, or
teeth, um, where they mineralize and will remain locked
for eternity. Which is uh really incredible. And so
that allows us actually to go very deep into
time, for example, some of the very early prominences
that have been analyzed for isotopes include, uh, you
know, Ardipithecus hamius, you know, 4.2, 4.4 million years
somewhere around there, um, where we can actually like
measure the biochemical signal in the tooth enamel. And
say something about what categories of food uh these
early hominins were consuming. In this case, like the
question was, are they living in an environment and
consuming resources in an environment that's more uh uh
forest like, more like a closed canopy, more moist
environment, or is it like out in the open,
more dry savanna landscape of East Africa. And so,
um, isotopes are, uh, a really, really important uh
tool that has been used like later, uh, or
in, in, um, a more recent, uh, time, uh,
epoch, uh, we can also, you know, move away
from just being able to work with teeth. We
can actually work. With bones, um, particularly by extracting
the proteins out of the bones. Uh, SO the
bones in our, uh, the bones and the proteins
in our bones are really like derived from the
proteins that we consume through food, right? And so
there's this direct relationship here. And so a lot
of work, for example, on uh Neanderthals, but also
early modern humans has been done in uh bone
collagen, where we look at uh the carbon and
nitrogen stable isotope ratios specifically to get an idea
about the position of uh these species. um, IN,
in their, in their food web, right? Are they
herbivores? Uh, ARE they omnivores or are they like
true carnivores, as we know now for a long
time, for example, for, uh, a lot of groups
of Neanderthals that they were really like top predator,
um, carnivores. They also plants, but like we were
incredible uh hunters and meat eaters.
So, I have 2 or 3 follow-up questions to
all of that. So the first one is, how
detailed of a picture can we get about the
specific ominence diet? I mean, can we pinpoint specific
kinds of foods or can we only learn about
some of the more General categories of foods that
it ate, uh, or perhaps if it was harder
or softer food or if it was more, uh,
plant-based or meat-based. I mean, how much can we
extract in terms of information from fossils about diet?
Yeah, that's, that's exactly like the, the big, the
big question that we've been working on, uh, as
a scientific community for decades to actually like bring
more tools into the tool kit to get more
and more precise with our, um, estimation and evaluation
of past diets. Because each method is actually very
limited. And what we can say. So, and you're,
you're really touching on this, um, we cannot say,
uh, this species was eating this, um, um, fruit
or this specific herb, or they were eating this
specific kind of mammal, right? But what we can
say, for example, using, uh, isotope ratios. Is often
how much of the diet was composed of vegetation
and how much was composed of, for example, the
meat or other tissues of, uh, herbivorous animals, right?
So this, particularly with isotopes, it's really linked or
our understanding of how we use the method is
really want to understand how much they're actually consuming.
Uh, MEAT versus, uh, vegetation, right? Uh, BECAUSE like
in early human evolution, we have like this big
debate about, you know, man the hunter or man
the hunted, right? Um, THAT kind of like only
resolves like around the time of. Homo erectus, where
I think everybody has this consensus that we understand
that they were indeed hunting, uh, possibly also still
scavenging opportunistically, but that they were very well uh
able to hunt uh larger game. Uh, IN the
earlier, uh, um, uh, hominin record, it is much
more tricky. Uh, SO in early Homo or Homo
habilis, it's not as, uh, clear how much these
guys are actually eating meat, but we would like
to know. Because the whole hypothesis about um the,
the really incredible investment into brain growth, right, and
having like, uh, in our lineage, this trajectory towards
getting like bigger and bigger brains and becoming smarter
and smarter. The main hypothesis for the longest time
has been that this was driven by consumption of
meat and then some people like made it a
little bit more uh specific. It's not actually the
meat is also it's just like high caloric um
animal resources. Like, for example, fat, right? If we
think about like brain tissue is incredibly nutritious, that's
not necessarily meat, um, uh, or also bone marrow,
being incredibly rich in in fats, for example, and
we don't consider that meat, right? Uh, AND the
cool thing is like that, uh, we have this
limitation, uh, in, in each method, but sometimes these
methods that have a little bit of a complimentary
information. So for example, as you already said, like
for example, the uh uh dental wear analysis doesn't
say something about like if meat or if plants
were consumed, but is uh provides a lot of
information if hard foods or tough foods were consumed,
right? And so if you like different lines of
evidence together, we have like this emerging. Picture if
a certain diet was more likely. For example, if
a specific specimen of early hominin was maybe eating
a little bit of meat, um, uh, or was,
uh, as we see in like some specimens, they
probably like seasonally eating like incredibly hard. Um, um,
FOOD resources where you can think about like, what
can that be? What, what kind of seed pod
or not is that hard that it would leave
these like indentations on the in the teeth, um.
So, uh, here, I would really like to also
emphasize that, uh, method development is, uh, ongoing in
this, uh, field of research, right, all these different
methods, they're getting like more and more luids and
fine grained and, uh, getting to, um, the nature
of food resources, uh, that we can identify in
the fossil record. Um, NAMELY, uh, in the isotope
world, we just recently had a gigantic breakthrough methodologically,
uh, by finally being able to measure nitrogen isotopes
into tooth enamel. So up to very recently, up
to like a few years ago, we were limited
to measure carbon isotopes, uh, into the enamel of
fossils and oxygen isotopes. Well, carbon isotopes actually in
the archaeological record and the fossil record, basically only
tell you something about, uh, a critter, um, being
out, uh, foraging in an open savannah landscape that
it's dominated by specific. um TYPE of grasses that
has a different photosynthetic pathway, uh, we call them
uh C4 grasses, and they have a very distinct
carbon isotope signature compared to all the other plants
on planet Earth that have a C3 photosynthetic pathway.
And those plants, for example, uh, particularly in the
African context, are more limited to a more denser
woodlands and, and forest environments. So, so far, Carbon
isotopes could only in combination with oxygen, tell us
something about if a hominin was thriving out in
the savannah woodland, or if they were living in
a forest, which again, is, you know, gives you
an idea of what environment they utilize, which is
valuable and very important, but it doesn't really get
to this question like, well, what are they actually
eating? So, uh, since very recently, um, uh, some
colleagues, uh, are able to measure nitrogen isotopes in
tooth enamel, and that was a gigantic breakthrough because
there's actually incredibly tiny amounts of nitrogen that are
found in tooth enamel. So nitrogen is an element
that is associated with protein, proteins in uh in,
in the, in the body. Um, AND you maybe
can imagine that in our white tooth enamel, and
tooth crown, there's very little protein in there, right?
That stuff doesn't really need to be flexible or
be able to bend to pressure. We want this
stuff to be as hard as possible. So tooth
enamel is actually the hardest um material that we
have in the in the body, right? Which is
why we can use it in such deep time
context, which is awesome. However, nitrogen is actually the
isotope that has the biggest um differentiation between trophic
levels. So in nitrogen, we can really see if
an animal is a an herbivore or a carnivore,
or if it's like an animal that's like somewhere
intermediate, you know, utilizing both plants and animal resources
in the diet. And so it was really frustrating
that given there's such tiny amounts of nitrogen in
enamel. It was kind of impossible for us to
measure these tiny amounts. And actually like when I
um started working with isotopes uh as a student,
um, it was never even mentioned really, right? Like
in the in the chemical formula of um hydroxyappatite,
which makes tooth enamel, there's no nitrogen in there,
so we've never really talked about these tiny quantities
of nitrogen that are actually embedded in the mineral
matrix of uh the tooth enamel. And so, a
really cool new method that was, uh, as far
as I understand, uh, developed at the University of
Princeton. Uh, AND is now, uh, applied very widely,
uh, by my colleague Tina Ludike at the Max
Planck Institute for Chemistry. They, um, are utilizing this
new method where they hand over tiny amount of
tooth enamel to bacteria that target these tiny amounts
of the nitrogen in the tooth enamel. They eat
it up, and then they literally Uh, fart out
whatever they ate, uh, and then you can actually
collect that, you know, kill the bacteria and then
collect the gas that they were producing, and that's
enough. Then to actually hand it over to a
mass spectrometer and measure it. And so, uh, Tina's
team uh at the Max Planck uh in uh
uh Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, they are now
starting to work on all of these fossil hominids
that we have been speculating about for decades now,
what their diet. Very, uh, adaptation actually looked like
with contradictory evidence coming from carbon isotopes or from
dental wear, or from morphology and also like from
the entire environmental context. And, um, they're not producing
actually data for some of these fossil hominins. And
from there you can see that it looks like
some of these species were largely Herbivores, they are
mainly determined like their main dietary everyday um uh
adaptation was consuming plants, materials, uh, and then occasionally
they also were consuming meat. And so like that
is kind of like um there will be a
lot of very, very uh incredible new papers published
uh by, by this lab, um uh over the
next few years uh as they like move through
analyzing all these, um, specimens, uh, from the archaeological
record in in eastern South Africa. Um, AND this
is. Also where my work on, uh, extant chimpanzees
actually comes in because like over the last decade
or so, or maybe 15 years by now, um,
I've been like trying to, um, demonstrate, uh, how
these isotopes that we use to measure in uh
the archaeological and fossil record. How they actually look
like in chimpanzees today, right? And chimpanzees being like
one of the animals out there that we use
as a reference model for early human evolution, uh,
because there's so many things that are um. Um,
YOU know, intriguing about chimpanzees, not just their ecology,
but also like their comparable body size. They are,
uh, very, very social primate. They're tool users, right?
They, they, they're, they're very uh sophisticated creatures that
have culture. Um, AND so we're kind of like,
uh, leaning very much on, um, and chimpanzees, they're
not a perfect model, but they're very useful model.
Um, AND I've been working a lot on kind
of developing an isotopic framework. Well, how do these
isotopes actually, uh, look like in chimpanzees where we
know what they're eating, we know how much meat
they're eating, and how useful are these um biochemical
tools actually in detecting these low rates of meat
consumption. And my work has been a little bit
critical uh about how useful um these isotopes actually
uh are in this context, and I'm like happy
to talk about that, uh, a little bit more.
Mhm. So, yeah, we're all, I'm also going to
ask you about other great apes, particularly the closest
to us, that would be chimpanzees and bonobos. But
uh let me ask you also in regards to
dentition, uh, can we get information from TIFF by
just looking, simply by looking at the types of
dentition that a particular hominin species has, and I
mean, Looking at uh the different types of teeth,
the incisors, the canines, the premolars, and the molars,
and perhaps the number of each type of teeth
they have and uh perhaps dental anatomy as well.
Can we just get information just from that?
Generally speaking, yes, um, but like, um, the, the
primates, the primate order actually has uh a very
generalized dentition. Uh, OUR teeth are, uh, so we
have the same number of teeth, right? Like we
share the same number of teeth with, uh, uh,
all great apes, uh, and with, um, uh, other,
uh, primates that are around. Planet Earth today. And
we also have the same number and typology of
teeth that we share with our, um, fossil hominid
ancestors, right? Um, AND generally, like our dentition is
quite generalized. Our teeth are good for pretty much
everything and nothing, right? But it's true that, uh,
particularly tooth size, uh, can be linked to Uh,
how much we actually invested into chewing, right, mastication.
And so we have like some candidate species, for
example, uh, parent parentthropus boisea, uh, that many of
your listeners may have heard about, uh, as Nutcracker
man, um, uh, a Texan. Of uh hominids, uh,
that we find in East Africa, and they have
these gigantic mastication apparatus, these gigantic jaws and like
really, really big teeth, including like very, very big
molars. And so they are really like um teeth
that look like they're like, um. Able to chop
down and grind down like really either tough or
very hard um matter and then here we really
think that they're more consuming. Uh, VEGETATION, right? And
then the big question is like, what kind of
vegetation and how can, uh, eating, um, a relatively
poor vegetation matter that's very top, such as grasses,
how on earth can that fuel the relatively large
brain that we find in this hominin species, right?
So like parental poise, there is like, uh, um,
a, a plethora of Incredible papers out there that
are like showing like the contradiction of brain size
and a mastication in, uh, this particular, uh, species.
But generalized, uh, dentition, uh, means that, uh, our
teeth are not showing any evidence for being specialized,
for example, uh, as you would see in a
carnivore, to, um, Uh, to capture prey and bring
down prey, right? Like, so we don't have a
teeth that suggests that we're carnivores, uh, and none
of the, uh, fossil hominids, right? So we don't,
um, for a long time we already have not
these gigantic, um, uh, uh, canines that you, for
example, still see in chimpanzees, and chimpanzees probably also
don't have them for um. IN association with diet,
right, chimpanzees still have like particularly the males, like
relatively large canines. They're quite impressive and can do
quite some harm, but they don't have them because
of the fact that they occasionally hunt and bring
down, um, a prey. They have it for male
male competition. They basically just have it, um, so
they can, you know, beat each other up, uh,
better, right? Um, AND which makes sense because the
females have like slightly, they still have like larger
uh canines than, than we do, but females have
smaller canines than males do, which suggests that it's
not a dietary, um, uh, in relationship to diet,
but it is more related to sexual competition. Um,
SO that said, the number of teeth. Is the
same across all of us nutcracker men, chimpanzees, uh,
us, nematas, we all have pretty much the same,
a very, very similar, um, dentition, which is why,
um, actually looking into the dental wear and isotope
ratios, uh, is a, is a more, uh, useful
proxy to help us solve this puzzle.
So earlier you mentioned chimpanzees. Is there any other
great ape species that you also study?
Um, YEAH, so I'm actually like very, very, uh,
lucky, uh, to be, uh, one of the people
who studies all African great apes, um, uh, using
isotopes. Um, SO, uh, I started working, um, on
bonobos, uh, and here really the question was, uh,
how does the isotopic. Profile of, uh, our closest
cousin, right, chimpanzees and bonobos being our closest, um,
living relatives, uh, on planet Earth today. And so
the question really was, uh, how does the isotopic
profile for carbon and nitrogen isotopes of this, uh,
incredible a species that's endemic to, um. The forest,
uh, of the Congo, south of the Congo River.
How does it look like? Because, uh, just a
few years before that, uh, my colleagues actually, uh,
made the first observations that Bonobos, uh, regularly hunt
for, uh, primate prey. There was like before that
some anecdotal information that bonobos were occasionally, you know,
uh, capturing like some smaller. Animal, um, there's like
some early papers where, uh, researchers described Bonobos capturing
like a little tree squirrel or something like that,
and then basically playing it to death. And then
when the animal is dead, you know, oh, I
might as well eat it, right? But, uh, my
colleagues from the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
uh, specifically at the site of Lucota, they really
made observations that these, uh, bonobos are not just
occasionally using the opportunity. To grab a diker, which
is a small forest antelope, uh, that often just
like hunkers down and so you can imagine it's
actually easy to actually capture, relatively speaking, but they
were actually like going up in the trees and
hunting for monkeys, right? And so like that kind
of like. Changed our entire uh perception of bonobos,
right, the species that we would normally refer to
as make love not war. They're always chill, they,
um, uh, they, they're never showing aggression in any
kind, right? Like, no, they actually do hunt. Uh,
ACTIVELY, and they kill, um, other primates, um, and
then more recently we actually know that the rates
of male male aggression in bonobos is actually even
higher than what we see in, uh, chimpanzees. There
was a really fascinating paper that came out, uh,
last year or so, uh, or maybe 2 years
ago, uh, by now. Um, BUT so I first
started working on bonobos just to see if using
the stable isotope approach, measuring hair samples from sleeping
nests of these, uh, animals, do we detect these
low amounts, uh, but, you know, reoccurring, uh, meat
eating events, uh, these low amounts of meat, do
we detect that in their isotope profiles that we
have? Uh, IN here. Um, AND that was my,
my first, um, project on grade 8. I was
still a PhD student by then, um, doing actually
working on archaeological research questions. And, um, I would
have to, I have to say no, we actually
do not see, uh, any spikes in their nitrogen
isotope ratios after they had like a phase where
they were doing a lot of hunting. Um, OR,
uh, we had like a very, very interesting phase,
uh, that we could capture in that study, where
for about a week, uh, there was, um, um,
a caterpillar boom in the forest. Uh, SO there's
apparently like, I don't know if it's, we don't
even know if it's like one or several species
of butterflies that are just reproducing, uh, uh, over,
you know, they're, they're not seen for years and
then you have like this one. SEASON where the
whole forest is just raining down with these gigantic
caterpillars. And the bonobos were having, like, they were
having a feast, you know, they were eating pounds
and pounds of these caterpillars every day. And I
measured the nitrogen isotope ratios of these caterpillars. And
you could see that, yeah, they are eating vegetation,
so they are looking like a typical herbivore. So
they actually have a similar isotope signature as an
antelope, a forest antelope would. Um, AND so the
prediction was then, well, if they're eating these caterpillars
for a full week, we should see a meat
eating response, right? Like the the nitrogen iso values
of the bonobos eating them would spike in that
time period, but it didn't. What we did see,
however, was that um adolescent males that are um
relatively low ranking and bonobo society, right? Uh BONOBOS
are uh living in a matriarchy, so females having
a very, very strong bonds with each other that
allow them uh to actually rule the, the community.
And so, adolescent and uh upcoming males are relatively
low in their social dominance uh rank in the
community. And we could see that yes, indeed their
nitrogen profiles were much lower than everybody else's, kind
of supporting the the observation that they often get
kind of like left out of any meat eating.
Um, OPPORTUNITIES. So that was kind of the only
indicator that we have that maybe nitrogen isotopes can
to some degree track the presence of presence or
absence of meat in a great apes diet, but
it was kind of like inconclusive, um. I then
moved on uh to another really awesome opportunity to
um do an isotopic study on, um. Lowland gorillas
from Gabon, um, so, uh, western lowland gorillas that
are uh coexisting, so living in symmetry, uh, with,
uh, chimpanzees, uh, in a field sites, uh, at
the Atlantic coast of Gabon, an incredible place called
Loango, um, and here the question was a very,
very different one. It was not really related to
meat consumption, um, but we just wanted to see
how much these uh Um, gorillas and chimpanzees that
utilize a similar environment that overlap with each other
dietarily, um, how much they actually overlap. And if
there's maybe a seasonal difference in how much they
overlap in their diet. Because, um, this kind of
conflict or the question is like, is, is there
like resource competition between gorillas and chimpanzees was like
something that, uh, I thought was very, very interesting.
Because we always think that Gorillas, oh yeah, you
know, they just eat like terrestrial herbaceous vegetation, you
know, they just sit around on the ground and
just eat leaves. And that's absolutely not true. Particularly,
uh, lowland gorillas actually eat a lot of ripe
fruit. Um, AND from previous work, we knew that,
uh, the gorillas in loanbo, yeah, they kind of
like have a different feeding preference, so they like
slightly different fruit than chimpanzees. But there are a
lot of species of fruit that both chimpanzees and
gorillas actually really like. And so you can imagine
that there's a conflict potential, right? Like if these
two species, um. Compete over the same resource. And
so looking actually at the isotope ratios in the
hair of uh chimpanzees and gorillas from Luongo, we
could see that they have a lot of like
ni niche partitioning, so they are like their dietary
profiles are separate with the gorillas eating indeed, much
more terrestrial herbaceous vegetation, and the chimpanzees really being
much, much more specialized in ripe fruits, but there
was also a lot of overlap. Um, PARTICULARLY seasonally,
there's like a couple of fruit species that they
both like, and, uh, that might be like kind
of like boring to kind of, uh, uh, look
into the specifics of that, but just a couple
of years ago, there was actually the first observation
ever made of the chimpanzees at Loango actually killing
uh a lowland gorilla, uh, it's at this specific
field site, right? Um, WHICH was, uh, as far
as I know, like was kind of like an
open question, like, what, what do chimpanzees and gorillas
do when they bump into each other in the
wild, right? And so we can assume that like
if groups bump into each other, right particular gorillas
having like these enormous silverback males that are very
capable. In defending their community and their family, um,
that they would probably like avoid each other, right?
Uh, JUST like we know, chimpanzees bumping into elephants,
you know, they go like, Oh, we'd rather get
out of here, right? But in this case, they
actually bumped into a single individual. And the chimpanzees,
they killed this gorilla, right? And so the, then
the picture kind of works that. Um, YOU know,
showing this level of aggression to another species of
great ape in their habitat. Actually makes a little
bit of sense because they have dietary overlaps, so
they're competing over resources. And so um that was
kind of like a um uh I hope that
my colleagues at Loango will not have to witness
this again because I think it was a very
horrible thing to actually see and uh observe. Um,
BUT I think it's really interesting how, again, like
the competition over food resources, how that obviously also,
uh, predicts, you know, social behavior and also social
behavior or behavior between species.
So when it comes to comparative biology in the
specific case of diet and the diets of great
apes, to what extent can we derive information from
studying, for example, chimpanzees and bonobos that would apply
to our last common ancestor and perhaps the earlier
ominence?
Mhm. Yeah, I think this is a very, very
interesting question. So, um, I like doing this, this
work on, you know, looking at bonobos and, you
know, looking at um uh niche petitioning between gorillas
and chimpanzees, um, I actually started looking into like
a lot of other like also chimpanzee populations across
Africa. And so here I think chimpanzees are a
particular useful model in terms of using this method,
uh, isotope analysis, because chimpanzees have adapted to a
vast range of environmental conditions throughout the African continent,
right? When we have chimpanzees that are living uh
in primary evergreen rainforests, uh, for example, we have
some uh incredible study populations in West Africa. Uh,
THEY are living in these ancient forests, um, they,
they never see a grassland, right? Uh, AND the
food resources that they can, um, uh, utilize in
these ecosystems, um, are completely different from some of
the chimpanzee populations out there that live in woodland
savannah environments, um, that are very open, um, very
dry, very seasonally, uh, incredibly dry, very hot. Um,
AND so we, we actually know for a couple
of years that we have chimpanzees that are living
in absolutely outrageous environments. For example, in, uh, the,
the Senegal, uh, where previously people never thought that
they could survive out there because it is so
dry seasonally and also so hot. Um, AND so
that makes chimpanzees actually an incredibly useful model for
early human evolution, uh, if we're thinking that. Um,
A lot of the drivers of, uh, bipedalism and
brain growth and increased sophistication and tool use may
have been driven in that environmental shift from our
ancestors kind of like moving out of the forests,
um, into more open environments of woodland savannah, and
here it's very important to also um understand that
it's not. Our ancestors leaving their environments and moving
somewhere else, but it's the environment that's changing, right?
Um, SO we have uh large climatic uh changes,
um, uh, in, in the, the, the, the Pleistocene
that are really like affecting the um expansion of
grasslands in Africa, so forests are receding. That environment
that our earlier ancestors, our common ancestors that we
shared with with chimpanzees and bonobos, we're probably a
forest adapted uh critter, um, and then the environment
is changing and, you know, you can either go
with it or you, you know, basically go extinct
by like sticking to these little pockets of of
forest, or you, uh, may, might might still survive
in those pockets as, you know, chimpanzees and bonobos,
their ancestors, obviously. Uh, SURVIVED by going the route
of staying in the forest, right? Whereas like early
hominins like they were probably really thriving and proliferating
uh into different species, uh, because of the expansions
of these woodland grasslands and the mosaic of like,
you know, little gallery forests around rivers, uh, so
that I really Mix of different habitat types, um,
that, uh, that you can find like emerging in
South and, uh, in East Africa. And so there
are some chimpanzees that you can basically find across
equatorial Africa that match all these different environments, which
is really amazing. Um, SO we have, uh, for
For example, the loan chimpanzees, they are a great
candidate, uh, if you're interested in a hominin that
lives in a mosaic of environments. So you have
patches of, uh, open savannah, uh, you have swamps,
you have gallery forests, um, and so that is
the environment that the loan chimpanzees live in. Uh,
WE think a lot of our Uh, ancestors in
East Africa particularly, uh, came out of, uh, a
savannah type that we refer to as miombo, Myombo
woodland. Uh, THOSE are very, very, it's a very
particular kind of, uh, woodland because it's. Dominated by
um a specific kind of trees, um that actually
produce a relatively uh nutrient poor soils, um, uh,
and so this is kind of like the environment
that we think a lot of our ancestors evolved
in. Um, SO they're like relatively open environments with
these miombo trees, so these are woody legumes, um,
and then interspaced by like, you know, uh, gallery
forests around like some creeks and rivers, um, you
know, in a relatively hilly, uh, landscape. Um, AND
so we have chimpanzees that live in these kind
of environments, like, particularly, uh, one, population of chimpanzees
that, um, I had the privilege, uh, to, um,
uh, to study and I have, uh, you know,
several ongoing projects is uh a field site called
Isa Valley in Tanzania, and this is absolutely stunning,
um. Uh, FIELD site, uh, you know, uh, your
listeners, if they want to like, uh, get an
idea, they can like check it out. It's uh,
they can find it under the website called GERC,
um, uh, I think it is it gmerc.com. Um,
uh, SO the Isa Valley is these open savannah
woodlands. Interspersed with these beautiful Miabo trees that provide
seed pots that are, you know, uh, relatively, uh,
large food resources that chimpanzees love to utilize, um,
interspaced by like these beautiful gallery forests. And these
chimpanzees are a very, very useful model actually for
fossil hominins because it's a very similar environment. Um,
YOU know, we have a long dry season, um,
uh, we have a relatively short, uh, rainy season,
so climatically probably also very, very similar, um, and
a similar environment and the spec like also the
species community out there being like relatively comparable to,
uh, the species community that was around. Uh, A
couple of million years ago. And so we actually
have like several, uh, projects, uh, going on, um,
uh, at ISA with isotopes. And so here, the
big challenging thing is actually that this Mbo environment
is, um, producing relatively low, low nitrogen isotope values
because these trees that are dominating this landscape are
legumes. And I don't know how much you know
about. LEGUMES, but legumes are, uh, able to actually
fixate, um, nitrogen from the air, right? So they're
not exclusively most other plants are just taking it
up, uh, from the soil through with the help
of bacteria. Well, these trees, legumes, including, you know,
like your, your bees and beans and your lentils
and your peas and your alfalfa, all these plants
are actually able to fixate air nitrogen, also to
the help of bacteria. And so the nitrogen iso
values are very, very low in this environment. Um,
AND so now that we are actually able to
measure nitrogen isotope ratios in fossil hominins, right? So,
um, this new method that was developed in Princeton,
we need more framework. Works from these kind of
environments that are pretty messy in terms of the
isotope ratio. So produce really weird values. And we
need a good contextual framework to understand, well, how
does meat eating look like in this environment? Right?
Um. Where all the nitrogen iso values are relatively
low because of the presence of these woody legumes,
um, another project that we, uh, just started at
this field site that, uh, I just wanted to
mention because I'm beyond excited about this project is
we're looking into the role of mushrooms as well.
So I don't know, uh, how. You love mushrooms,
but like I'm very, very much interested in, uh,
uh, also foraging for mushrooms here in the beautiful
redwood forests of California. Um, AND mushrooms are, uh,
a very important food resource, and we still have
no idea if And if yes, how much? FOSSIL
hominids and early hominids may have been actually using
this incredible food resource, right? Because if we know
that early hominins were large brained, that would suggest
that they're relatively smart, right, and have a quite
detailed understanding of their environment. We know that chimpanzees
uh have those abilities, right? Like chimpanzees know exactly
which trees are fruiting when and where to go,
depending on the season. And they can, um, have,
uh, uh, really like mental maps of their, their
territory in terms of where food resources are. Um,
AND chimpanzees know which mushrooms they can eat and
which one they can't. And mushrooms are incredibly high
in protein, and also like some of them have
a very, very uh important uh trace minerals in
them. Right? And so we're actually doing a project
now, uh, looking at like, well, how do the
isotopes actually look like in these mushrooms? Because there's
incredible work that has been done on a variety
of mushrooms. Mushrooms can look like meat in terms
of the isotope ratios. So if we ever determined
that we might find a fossil hominin taxon that
has really high nitrogen isole ratios and the community
goes like, Oh, we finally found this one hominin
that was like eating tons of meat. We might
actually want to think about like, well, were they
eating a lot of meat? Were they maybe also
eating mushrooms, right? That's something that was actually proposed
also for Neanderthals, right? Neanderthals in Europe, having these
really high nitrogen isotope values. And a lot of
that we can explain by them, um, hunting mammoths,
wooly mammoths, um, that for whatever reason also has
unusual high nitrogen iso values. So if you eat
a critter like that, you will really like your
isotope ratios will look like you are a top,
uh, carnivore. But we also know that, uh, Neanderthals
were utilizing a ton of plant resources, uh, year
round, right? Um. And so my question is still
like, well, what about the mushrooms, right? Um, AND,
uh, I find it very interesting because like, at
least here in Santa Cruz, like mushrooms are very,
very much beloved by the local community. Um, THERE'S
like a, they're very much an up and coming,
uh, food resource here. Um, AND, uh, I really
like the, the idea that we're finally getting at
that question of mushrooms in the diet of chimpanzees.
Great. So, uh let me ask you now, what
do we know about the human diet during the
Paleolithic?
Yeah, um, that's a great question. So I was
kind of like a little bit touching on that,
right? So if you're thinking about like moving out
of Africa, do you want to stay in Africa?
Are we moving out of Africa into like the
more interesting questions of what's happening during the Paleolithic
in in Europe, where we have like all these
different uh hominins running around, like Homo sapiens being
around and the Neanderthals being around and Denisovans being
around. Um, SO just to make clear, uh, I'm
not a Paleolithic archaeologist, right? So I personally have
never done any work on, uh, Paleolithic hominins, um,
uh, but my PhD adviser Mike Richards, for example,
um, did a lot of work on, um, on
the dietary ecology of Neanderthals using stable isotope analysis,
um, and he was studying like a lot of
fossil. Prominence, uh, uh, sorry, Neanderthals, uh, from various
sites, uh, in, uh, in Europe, uh, in Eurasia.
Um, AND so yeah, what we know of, of
these, um, guys is, uh, a lot of information
of course comes from the formal assemblages that we
can find at these sites. Again, at that point,
we don't have any big questions if um. Humans
were cognitively and physiologically able to hunt and bring
down large game. Uh, I think like the community
is very much, uh, agrees that with Homo erectus
leaving Africa, uh, we have this relatively tall, actually
impressively tall hominin that can apparently like conquer Eurasia,
um, and possibly also by following, uh, herds of,
of herbivores, right? Seasonally migrations of large herbivores, um.
So, um, uh, the interesting thing that, uh, researchers
have looked at is, um, the, the dietary ecology
of these different hominins that are utilizing similar uh
spaces, for example, within Europe. Um, AND so some
of the interesting question was, uh, and then, you
know, like I, I already talked a little bit
about like the niche differentiation between sympatrick, so co-existing
gorillas and chimpanzees. Well, how does it look like
with two hominids, right? Uh, SO in most places
that we were around in Africa, for example, we
were. Coexisting at the same time, where our ancestors
were co-existing with other hominid species, which is something
that we can, uh, not really imagine because, uh,
Homo sapiens has been alone on this, um, planet
now for quite some time, right? Like 10s of
thousands of years. But, um. In our past, there
have always been some hominins around, right? Like, so
we know that, um, for example, Homo naledi, right?
uh um AN African, uh, South African hominin was
clearly around when Homo sapiens was running around already
for a long time. That's we just have to
think about that. So similarly, it's kind of crazy
to think that you have Neanderthals and modern or
anatomically modern humans coexisting in Europe. And the big
question is like, well, what do they do, right?
Well, through genetics, we of course know that there
was some. Interactions between the two species, right, with
uh anyone alive, any human alive today, um, outside
or outside of uh African ancestry, actually having, you
know, uh, Denisovan and also uh Neanderthal DNA, uh,
in our genome. Um, BUT the big question was
about like the diet. So how do these two
Coexisting, overlapping in space and time prominence, um, how
do they diets allow for that, right? Or are
they competing um dietarily? And so the, the picture
that kind of emerged over the last few decades
and uh I would like to claim that isotope.
Analysis was part of, um, uh, of the puzzle
here. Really looks like that, um, Neanderthals, um, were
initially thought to like be very much like just
large game hunters, like incredibly sophisticated in, um. Uh,
TRACKING and bringing down like gigantic mammals such as
the wooly mammoth, but also wooly rhino, um, horses,
uh, and so on and so forth. Whereas, um,
an anatomically modern humans, um, probably, you know, also
being capable in hunting large game, but Also not
being shy of eating small animals, right? Like so
small to medium sized mammals, um, or aquatic birds,
and so on and so forth, right? Um, SO
it's not the point that, uh, nanotis were not
utilizing these resources at all, but it just seems
that modern humans were just more, uh, More versatile
in what they would, you know, what resources that
they would uh exploit. Whereas Neanderthals really seem to
have a thing for uh the wooly mammoth for
for quite some time. Um, AND, uh, which makes
sense, right? Like you can bring down one animal
and like your, your family or community can actually
utilize that resource for quite a long time, right?
If we think that they probably have the ability
to, to smoke meat, uh, and then also the
winters being relatively long and cold that you could
also like, you know, freeze the meat and so
on and so forth. Um, HOWEVER, over the last,
uh, decades and, uh, the, the role of, um,
plants in the diet, particularly of nano tiles, um,
has shifted, so there has been like some incredible,
uh, work by, for example, uh, my colleague, um,
Amanda Henry, who's also was at the Max Planck
now, she's at Leiden University um in uh the
Netherlands. Uh, SHE did some incredible work about cooking,
right? And just finding evidence of Neanderthals actually cooking
plant matter, uh, and, you know, getting a higher
caloric return from actually like cooking vegetation, uh, by
analyzing, uh, dental calculus, so that mineralized tartar that
we have on our teeth, and that would actually
build up like big chunks if we wouldn't have
our dental cleanings. Regularly, um, you actually find a
lot of like, um, uh, plant remains or, or
also like the proteins of, of animals, uh, that
we consume that are kind of like entrapped in
there. Uh, AND so Amanda Henry, uh, found like
a lot of evidence for starch grains that nano
tiles were utilizing, uh, starches, starchy plant foods, uh,
in different places, uh, ranging from what today is,
um, the levan. Uh, RANGING all the way into,
uh, Central Europe, the Neanderthals were always cooking plants.
Um, AND it's a really, really, uh, incredible, um,
uh, research there. And of course, like we, we
know that early humans, um, leaving Africa were probably
also eating a lot of plant matter. But, uh,
the focus has always been on like, well, how
much meat are they eating and what kind of
animals are they bringing down. Uh, OF course, we
have a, uh, uh, a lot of, uh, archaeological
sites where we have like these gigantic assemblages of
all the fauna that was left behind by these,
uh, Paleolithic, uh, hunters, no matter if they're Neanderthals
or modern humans.
Does it make sense at all to talk about
a paleo diet? I mean, was there, and now,
uh, I want to focus particularly on Homo sapiens
because I guess it's about our, uh, it's on
our own species that people are focusing when they
talk about a supposed paleo diet. Uh, I mean,
were we really eating one single type of diet
in the Paleolithic?
Uh, YEAH, that's a great question. Uh, I would
say like probably no, right? Because like, within the,
the, if we think about like the Paleolithic and
the Ricardo, I'm not even sure like if the
the term paleo diet refers to the paleolithic, right?
Uh, I think it just refers to paleo in
terms of the ancient diet or the original diet,
right? The the diet we evolve with and like
if we would like um break it down to
like that definition, is like, then you have to
like return the question and say like, well when
paleo, right? Are we talking about um when we
were hunter gatherers? Are we talking about where we
were still living up in trees and like eating.
RIPE fruit, like chimpanzees, like how far back in
time do you want to go? But my understanding
what people refer to as paleo diet is referred
to as some vaguely ancestral diet before we became
sedentary and engaged in agriculture. Uh, AND so that
just, I'm just sick thinking that because there's um
quite a lot of meat and as far as
I know, also fish in that diet, right? Um.
And with the emphasis is, I think, uh, as
far as I understand, the, the paleo diet move
is to avoid carbohydrates, right? Or having like a
diet that's relatively low in carbohydrates, relatively high in
proteins, high in fats. And largely avoiding carbohydrates. And
so here is actually the problem um that um
all I think most of paleoanthropologists and biological anthropologists
agree on. We know that starchy foods, so carbon,
carbohydrate, rich foods, were probably very essential to early
human evolution. Um, AND so there's incredible work that
was done by, for example, um, uh, uh, Richard
Ringham, uh, and, uh, Rachel Caudi, uh, that actually
showed that, um, the role of tubers, uh, in
the diet in the early, um, uh, in the
early diet of hominins was probably one of the
catalysts. Of brain growth or like there's what we
call, uh, you know, hominids getting bigger and bigger
brains. So it might not have just been meats
and then going out and and hunting and getting
like a very, very nutritious meal full of protein
and fat, but it was probably, um. More or
at least equivalent um uh individuals from the community
going out and digging up tubers, for example, right?
So if um researchers are studying um the diet
of uh existing uh hunting. Gather us no matter
if we're talking about forest hunter gatherers that are
still existing in in some parts of the world,
for example, in the Central African rainforest, or if
we're looking at like some of the last savannah,
um, hunter gatherers, uh, for example, the Haza in,
uh, what is today Tanzania. These people, um, particularly
the women spent a lot of time in, uh,
searching and very successfully knowing exactly where to go
to find tubers that are incredibly rich in starches
and that are then Process, for example, pounded or
cooked to actually like um uh uh um utilize
the the starches, uh, starches, you know, um, uh,
are then turned into sugars, you know, pure, uh,
carbohydrates. And so that's exactly also what Amanda Henry
found in all these Neanderthals in, in Eurasia, is
they are probably eating some kind of tubers, right?
Like anything that's like rich in starches. And so,
um. To get back to your question about the
paleo diet, if I envision a paleo diet, yes,
I probably do see some amounts of meat in
there, uh, cooked meat, right? Because in that time
period, we have fire, we have like the. SECURED
and undisputed evidence for fire use that dates to
around like 700 or 800,000 years ago, right? We
think that we use fire before that, but we
just don't have solid evidence for it. Uh, BUT
at that time, we're cooking. Um, AND we're cooking
some meats and we're probably still eating a good
amount of fruit, nuts, seeds, but we're also eating
a lot of tubers. And so if you would
transfer that into a modern day paleo diet, you
would probably eat a lot of potatoes, uh, and
yam, and, uh, also other uh starchy foods, for
example, cereals, right? Uh, THAT'S also, you know, cereals
are, you know, domesticated grasses, right? And so we
can assume that, uh, early, um, um, foragers were
also utilizing, you know, the seeds of, of wild
grasses, right? And then ultimately we start domesticating them
because we thought they're so good. So. Yeah, the,
the whole paleo diet, but also the paleo diet
question, I think it's shifting all the time. It's
very much like uh um it's a, it's a
it's a fashion trend, right? In, in what to
eat, because people want to eat well, um, and,
uh, yeah, if there would be a little bit
more carbs in paleo diet, I think it would
be more authentically paleo.
And I mean, what were the main changes to
our diet that were brought about with the advent
of agriculture?
Well, agriculture changed everything, right? Um, AND like uh
just uh to to. Uh, KIND of take a
step back of like the, you know, when I,
when I was a student, like we still called
it the Neolithic Revolution, right, which always like, uh,
had like this uh uh tone to it like
that it was a very, very rapid process and
it's just like, you know, some, some community invented
it somewhere and like boom everything uh changed from
one day to the other. Um, SO the idea
that uh plans could actually be, uh. Manipulate it,
right? Um, AND, uh, to, to increase yields and
the reliability of finding these plants in a given
place and utilize them year after year, um, and
then actually becoming so good at it to become
like sedentary. That was invented by um uh uh
hunter gatherer forager communities in different parts of the
world, right? It just didn't happen only in the
Levant, it happened in different places in the world.
Um, THAT humans probably started with, um, some of
these grasses, for example, as I mentioned, right, like
we have like some of these grasses that are
being domesticated, for example, in, uh, East Asia, uh,
which then later turns into rice, and then we
have in the Levant, uh, uh, some wheat varieties
that we, uh, call emer. Corn, little barley, um,
that are have wild precursors that are already relatively
nutritious. And then we see that people are selecting
for specific traits in these plants that are favorable
for not only eating them, but also harvesting and
storing them, right? So for example, one trait. I
want to look at, or look for in a
grain is that the, the seeds of a plant
that shattered very little, so you could like pick
it and bring it, transport it without losing all
the seeds right away. That was probably a trait
that you were going for. If you want to,
you know, use some of those seeds and spread
them out. And then have them uh flourish and
provide food for the next season, right? So people
were doing that in many different places uh in
the world. Um, uh, THE beautiful thing is then
also we have like the proliferation of the. Of
of pottery that again, starts already with hunter-gatherers. We
have hunter-gatherers, uh, for example, in East Asia that
are already already using pottery, uh, as hunter-gatherer fishery
communities, right? Um. But the diet really changes because
um humans are suddenly able to spend more time
uh in what we before in hunter gatherer communities
refer to more as like base camps, like more
temporary uh season. uh, CAMPSITES that are moved, um,
at least like annually, you have to like go
somewhere else for like, you know, maybe the rainy
season or leave somewhere for the dry season and
so on and so forth. So these people are
now able to stay in the same place. Um,
AND. Not only utilize the environment for um obtaining
foods, but also start producing foods, right? uh STARTING
domesticate variety of plants, not only uh cereals, but
also legumes uh that we talked about earlier, right?
Like we start like seeing like some, you know,
for example, beans and peas, uh, being domesticated in
different places in the world, uh, and then of
course animals. And so part of that sedentary lifestyle
is being in the same place and using the
resources that you start producing. And what changes is
many things. So the diet particularly gets more starchy
than probably it ever has been before, because these
cereals are very nutritious, very hard in high in
carbohydrates. They're easy to store, relatively speaking, particularly when
you have pottery. Um, AND so people have a
lot of starches in their, uh, in their diet.
A lot of starches in your diet easily translates
into sugars, and you probably know that what happens
with your teeth if you have a relatively high
sugar diet, you start having like some oral hygiene.
Issues that are coming up, right? So that is
something that we, uh, initially, um, always connected with
the onset of agriculture that people get really shitty
teeth, right? People have like much, much higher frequencies
of lesions through cavities, through what we call carriers,
right? Um, AND so that, that has always been
like that picture with the onset of agriculture. Your
teeth are going bad and there's other health implications,
of course, living in the same place, um, probably
also um population number expanding, and we're living side
by side with all these domesticated animals. So we
suddenly are starting to deal with zoonotic disease, right?
So it's actually like in terms of Human health,
I think there's like some consensus that in terms
of human health, it was a little bit of
a bad idea to to to transfer from hunter
gatherer for your lifestyle into agriculture. Um, ALSO, what
we see in that time period, uh, at least
like what I'm familiar with more in Eurasia, uh,
is as soon as people become sedentary, also human-human
conflict, uh, starts to get bigger, right? And then,
of course, like, uh, at least like in the
Bronze Age, then we really have the proliferation or
the, the evolution of like social dominance hierarchies with
within human uh communities, um. And so on and
so forth. So whereas we often think of hunter
gatherer societies being more agilitarian, right? Uh, AND resources
being shared among group members. Um, BUT yeah, so
I think like really the, the idea is that
uh the onset of agriculture has a toll on
particularly the dental health of humans. There's some evidence
from archaeological sites of uh hunter gatherer populations that
are predating agriculture. That actually suggests that that might
be oversimplification of the picture. So we have some
hunter gatherer communities that are, for example, heavily dependent,
uh, rely on, um, on nuts, for example, acorns,
right? And acorns are really, really uh incredible food
resource if you know how to um actually process
them to make Copalatable. Uh, BUT once you reach
that, then you have a high caloric return, easy
to collect food resource, but it's high in starch,
hence it's high in sugar. And so we see
some hunter gatherer populations that eat a lot of
acorns, and they also have dental problems, just like
early agricultural societies do.
Mhm. Uh, BUT I mean, generally speaking, at least
when we're talking about the early farmers, their diets
were poorer than the diets of the hunter-gatherers,
right? I would not say that their diets were
poor. Um, OBVIOUSLY they were doing pretty well. It
was a lifestyle that was becoming very successful and
expanded. Relatively rapidly. And so, that said, like, you
know, I think there's an argument to be made
that the agricultural life that overpowered hunter gatherer communities
where where they actually like expanded into, right? We
see hunter gatherer populations uh either disappearing or assimilating
this lifestyle, right? So, uh, there must be some
success in that story, um, probably also connected with
the ability to, um, Uh, produce higher number of
offspring, right? We have like a population expansion, uh,
in that time period. So I wouldn't really say
that that it was, uh, like a negative outcome
for these people was highly successful. Um, THE one
thing is that I kind of like, my, my
personal view at least is, um, that life was
harder as a farmer, right? So we have many
Many studies that show that hunter gatherers, um, can
actually acquire, uh, in a very sustainable way enough
resources to meet their daily energetic, you know, caloric,
uh, requirements by just spending a few hours, you
know, out in the, in the bush or in
the forest and utilizing wild plants, mushrooms, wild animals.
And spending a lot of time like in in
communal and social activities after that. With agriculture, we
actually have societies that have to work their butts
off to um to to actually get enough like
the labor, the number of hours of labor expand,
right? And so, uh, but then those people are
also like able to produce more offspring, right? Uh,
PROBABLY because of the invention of like food storage
and all these things, so. Uh, I'm a person,
like I would rather prefer working less, uh, and
spending more time doing the things I love, uh,
um, but, um. It is uh uh um a
technology like using domesticated animals and domesticated plants that
apparently has been incredibly successful. Otherwise, we wouldn't be
where we are right now.
Right, but it wasn't it the case that when
it comes to their health, uh, I mean, their
nutrition in general wasn't as good as the nutrition
of hunter-gatherers because at least the early farmers were
shorter in stature and or is that outdated information?
Well, I'm actually like not sure what like the
the current uh discourse is uh regarding that. Um,
I don't know if like the, the picture is
very much like more about like later in like
the medieval period that like these farming communities are
getting like incredibly short and like, you know, are
like always like struck by. Like some incredible pandemic
diseases and famines and so on and so forth.
You know, when I'm thinking about like early hunter
gatherers, like I'm really thinking about um some of
these incredible archaeological sites, for example, in Anatolia, where
we have people that are still doing like small
scale hunting. Uh, BUT they are also domesticating wild
animals, and they have a range of domesticated plants
to their disposal. So they're like transitioning, uh, very
much into a more sedentary lifestyle, but they still
have like a lot of wild resources that they
can utilize, right? So we see that in a
lot of, um, uh, different places in the. WORLD
that, uh, hunter, uh, hunter gatherers like give up
that lifestyle, um, to, to join, uh, probably like
more sedentary agricultural, uh, societies, possibly even in uh
these uh scenarios where, you know. Big game has
moved on, and uh these farmers are sitting there
and are they're like utilizing the the resources that
they have gathered over the last 9 months and
they're doing just fine, right? Uh, AND if needed,
they can slaughter a goat or, or a sheep,
um. Uh, AND so, um, I, I don't think
that that picture of like earlier farmers being like
completely deprived and sick and tiny statured, uh, humans,
uh, is, is uh up to date anymore. Mhm.
OK, so, uh, I'm really getting mindful of your
time. We are reaching our time limit here. So
perhaps if you agree, we could have somewhere in
the near future another conversation just to wrap up
this bit about human diet, particularly now in the
Neolithic, and then also to talk about your more
recent work on the transatlantic slave trade. So, uh,
just before we go, where can people find your
work on the internet?
Oh yeah, so, uh, I'm actually like uh a
person who's not using social media for my science
communication at all. Uh, I have uh a website
uh where you can find me, um, that is
www uh PEA minus lab.com, so P E M
A. Uh LAB.COM, uh, and I try to keep
that updated with all my recent, uh, news coming
out, any kind of media coverage or um publications,
and, uh, I also like really try to, to
highlight the work of my incredible team of undergraduate,
uh, students, uh, and my, my post, um, previous
postdocs and, and uh graduate students, uh, on that
website. So yeah, uh, please guys check that out.
And you can also like find some more on.
Uh, INFORMATION about my work on, um, the transatlantic
slave trade. I, that's kind of like the thing
that I'm working on, uh, pri primarily now, uh,
besides my work, um, uh, on, uh, um, the
dietary ecology of African great apes. So I'm like
really doing weird twofold research, right? I'm a primatologist
and an archaeological scientist at the same time, a
lot of people find that quite, uh, confusing, but
I find it, uh, very, very, uh, stimulating. So,
uh. Um, YEAH, and Ricardo, I'd love to have
another conversation with you about my, my, my work
in, uh, more historical archaeology, actually, right? When I
never thought that I would ever get into, um,
particularly like I'm, I'm working on a, a very,
very prominent site in Portugal, uh, called the Valle
degaara in Lagos, um, which is the only site
that we know of in entire Europe where, um,
uh, enslaved Africans have been found in a, in
a mass burial. And so I'd love to talk
about that with you at another occasion.
OK, great. So very much looking forward to that
and thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show today. It's been really
fun to talk with you.
All right, thanks for the invitation. I really enjoyed
it too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Free Francaortolotti Gabriel Ponorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim
Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin,
David Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber,
Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.